6. Trace: Timeline & Internals
Built-in profilers give you lots of runtime data. Still, these tools mostly show either a summary or a static
snapshot. This can make it hard for a developer to really see how a Go program changes and moves over
513
time. For example, a profiler might say:
90% of allocations happen at line 35 in server.go
This tells you where the memory pressure starts, but it does not reveal which goroutine performed the
allocation, when it happened, or what else was occurring in the program at the same time. What Go lacked
was a tool for a dynamic and detailed view of execution, including the precise timing of events as they
occur.
That is what the Go execution tracer is designed for. The tracer provides a timeline of events as your
program runs, helping you answer in-depth questions about goroutine behavior, such as:
• When did this goroutine actually run?
• How long did it run before it became blocked?
• What caused it to block?
• Which other goroutine or event unblocked it?
• How did garbage collection affect the execution flow of this goroutine?
With the execution tracer, you can follow the full lifecycle of a goroutine. For example, imagine your web
server starts a new goroutine for every request:
go handleConnection(conn)
With tracing, you can see when handleConnection started, how long it spent waiting on I/O, how often the
scheduler stopped it, and if it was ever blocked on a mutex or a channel. This level of detail is extremely
helpful for understanding concurrency, finding bottlenecks, and debugging deadlocks.
Tracing is built into every Go binary and can be turned on during testing, at runtime using an HTTP
endpoint, or directly in your code. When tracing is off, it has almost no effect on performance.
The main idea is simple. When you turn on tracing, the Go runtime starts to record a series of events as
your program runs. These events show key runtime activities, and each one is timestamped very precisely,
down to nanoseconds. Each event also records details like what type of event it is, the OS thread ID, the
logical processor ID, the goroutine ID, a stack trace, and other fields based on the context. In Go, the word
"processor" means a logical unit set by GOMAXPROCS. This is the maximum number of goroutines that can
run at the same time, not the number of physical CPU cores.
The tracer records different types of events, such as:
• Scheduling events, which show when goroutines are started, blocked, unblocked, or ended,
• Network activity, which logs when goroutines block or resume on network I/O,
• System calls, which record when goroutines enter or leave a syscall,
• Garbage collection, which tracks when GC starts and ends, including steps like sweeping,
• User-defined events and logs, which you can add to the trace for custom tracking.
514
After you collect a trace with the runtime package, you can look at it with the built-in trace tool. This tool
opens up a browser-based viewer that shows a timeline for all goroutines, logical processors, and system
threads. By exploring this timeline, you can see the life of each goroutine, spot bottlenecks, and find the
causes of slowdowns.
Turning On Tracing (go test, HTTP, code)
You can start tracing using the go test tool with the -trace flag. This way is best when you want to analyze
performance in a controlled test run.
For example, you can run a specific benchmark and record a trace with this command:
go test -trace=trace.out -bench=. -benchtime=10s -cpu=16
This saves the trace to a file called trace.out. Later, you can analyze it using go tool trace.
For applications that are already running, such as servers, you can trigger tracing through an HTTP handler
at /debug/pprof/trace. You pass in a seconds parameter to control how long the trace should last. This
uses the same runtime tracing APIs and lets you trace remotely without changing or rebuilding your code.
curl http://localhost:6060/debug/pprof/trace?seconds=5 > trace.out
The most flexible way to use tracing is through the programmatic API in the runtime/trace package:
func main() {
  f, err := os.Create("trace.out")
  if err != nil {
  log.Fatal(err)
  }
  defer f.Close()
  if err := trace.Start(f); err != nil {
  log.Fatal(err)
  }
  defer trace.Stop()
  // Your logic here
  ...
}
Tracing by default gives you lots of information about memory, such as when garbage collection runs, how
the heap size changes, and more. If you want even more detail about memory, you can set the environment
variable GODEBUG=traceallocfree=1. When you do this, the trace includes three extra groups of events:
heap span events, heap object events, and goroutine stack events.
• Heap span events: Memory spans are how the runtime manages memory pages. Each span usually
515
covers several pages, often 8KB each. These events show when the runtime allocates or frees memory
regions. You also see all current spans at the start of tracing.
• Heap object events: These show every time your program allocates or frees a heap object. You see
when an object is allocated (malloc), freed (free), and all heap objects at the start of tracing.
• Goroutine stack events: These events show stack growth for goroutines. You see when a stack grows
or is freed.
You should not use this detailed tracing for normal profiling, because it slows down your program a lot.
Regular traces and heap profiles are enough for most performance work and have much lower cost. This
detailed memory trace feature is still experimental. It creates a huge amount of data and can slow your
program down a lot. But it lets you see exactly how Go manages memory in ways that were never possible
before.
Visualizing Traces
Proc-Oriented View (per-P lanes & flows)
The "proc view" is one of the main ways to visualize data in Go's trace tool. This view shows a timeline of
events, sorted by logical processors (P), so you can see exactly what was happening in your Go program
during the trace period.
When you open the trace viewer and use the proc view, you will see a complex layout with several sections
stacked vertically.
At the very top is the STATS section, which holds three important time series graphs:
Illustration 231. Goroutines, heap, and thread statistics
Here is what each graph shows:
• The "Goroutines" graph displays the number of active goroutines over time. If you click any point on the
timeline, you will get a breakdown of the goroutine states at that moment. You can see how many were
running, how many were runnable (ready to be scheduled), and how many were waiting (blocked). This
graph helps you understand your app's concurrency and spot possible scheduling problems.
• The "Heap" graph shows memory usage. The orange line is total heap allocation in bytes. The green
line is the GC threshold, which marks when the next garbage collection cycle will start. This view helps
you see memory patterns and how garbage collection affects your program.
• The "Threads" graph shows the number of OS threads Go sees as active (running or in a system call). If
you move your mouse along the timeline, you will notice that the count goes up when threads start
working (when their Ps are running) and goes down as soon as they are parked.
Below the STATS section are several more timelines, each focused on key runtime events:
516
Illustration 232. GC, network, and syscall events timeline
These show garbage collection events and runtime events that cause goroutines to wake up:
• The "GC" timeline shows when garbage collection is happening and what phase it is in, such as mark or
sweep. GC activity appears as colored blocks, and you can click them to see details about each GC
event.
• The "Network" lane shows unblock events when goroutines are woken up because of network activity,
such as when data arrives on a socket. These events have reasons like "network" and are handled by
the NetpollP special resource.
• The "Timers" lane shows when goroutines are woken up by timers, like after time.Sleep() or
time.After() finishes. These events are handled by the TimerP special resource.
• The "Syscalls" lane shows when goroutines come back from system calls that blocked. These events
are handled by the SyscallP special resource.
If your app does not use any network operations, timer functions, or blocking syscalls during the trace,
these special lanes will not appear.
NOTE
What are TimerP and SyscallP?
In the execution trace viewer, every vertical "lane" is labeled with a numeric P-ID. Real P-IDs
are numbered from 0 up to GOMAXPROCS-1 and correspond to the actual processors that
run Go code. Sometimes, however, the runtime needs to record an event that is not linked
to any real P.
To keep the timeline organized, the runtime creates a few special, or "pseudo," processor
IDs. These events get their own lanes:
• TimerP is a pseudo-P for timer-related wake-ups. When a sleeping goroutine's timer
expires, the timer thread wakes it up. That wake-up is shown on the TimerP lane
because no real processor was involved at that moment.
• SyscallP is a pseudo-P for wake-ups that occur when a goroutine returns from a
blocking system call. When a goroutine enters a long syscall, its P is returned to the
scheduler. When the syscall finishes, the goroutine becomes runnable again, but at that
moment, it does not yet have a P.
The main part of the trace viewer shows timelines labeled "Proc 0", "Proc 1", and so on. Each one
represents a logical processor (based on your GOMAXPROCS setting). Each processor can run only one
goroutine at a time.
517
Illustration 233. Goroutine execution spans across multiple processors
Let's break down how to read these timelines:
• Colored horizontal bars show when goroutines are running. Each goroutine has its own color and label,
such as "G1" or "G2". The label usually shows the main function the goroutine is running—for example,
"G1 runtime.main" means goroutine 1 is running the runtime.main function.
• When a goroutine moves to a different processor, its colored bar continues but appears in a new
processor lane. This happens when goroutines are parked or preempted by the scheduler.
• Under each execution bar, you may see small markers or vertical lines that indicate events in that
goroutine's lifecycle, such as:
◦ When the goroutine was created
◦ When a function call or return occurred
◦ Synchronization events (mutex locks and unlocks, channel operations)
◦ System calls
◦ Garbage collection activity
Each colored bar in a processor row means that goroutine was running on that processor at that time. The
color for each goroutine stays the same, even when it moves between processors, so you can easily follow
its path.
You can click on any execution bar to see a popup with more details, including:
• How long the span lasted
• The stack trace when the goroutine stopped or yielded
• What made the goroutine stop running, like a channel operation or locking a mutex
518
Illustration 234. Execution slice reveals goroutine duration and context
When you click on a slice, you get a detail panel. This panel shows complete info about that goroutine's run
period. For example, in the image, goroutine G211 is running the function StartUnmarshalWorkers.func1
from the VictoriaMetrics code.
The span for this goroutine starts at "4,228,638,336 ns" (about 4.23 seconds) after the trace begins. The
"Wall Duration" value of 2,157,696 ns means this execution span lasted about 2.16 milliseconds.
When you look at the stack trace, you will see two parts:
• "Start Stack Trace": This shows which functions were being called when the goroutine started running.
The most recent function call is listed at the top.
• "End Stack Trace": This shows the functions being called when the goroutine stopped running, again
with the most recent call at the top.
In this example, we can see that goroutine G211 started its execution by locking a mutex with
sync.(*Mutex).Lock(). It stopped when it was blocked while waiting to receive from a channel, shown by
runtime.chanrecv.
Now, look at the event on the right side. The "unblock (sync)" incoming flow means this G211 goroutine was
blocked on a synchronization primitive, and a different goroutine did something that unblocked it.
If we hover over the "unblock (sync)" link in the properties panel, the trace viewer highlights a flow arrow
between the two goroutines.
This makes it much easier to see which operations are directly related:
Illustration 235. Flow (red) arrow connects blocking and unblocking goroutines
We can also click on the "unblock (sync)" link. This opens more details about the flow event, such as the
event ID, how long the flow arrow lasted, and more.
519
The "outgoing flow" section will show which other goroutines were unblocked by the current goroutine.
There is also a "Related Events" section. This area shows events that are causally linked in the Go
execution trace. When you pick a goroutine execution span in the viewer, it figures out which other events
are related to that span. These related events are grouped in three ways:
• Preceding Events: These are events that happened before your chosen goroutine started running. They
came earlier and might have caused your goroutine to start.
Illustration 236. Visualizing causality: curved arrows show goroutine flow events
• Following Events: These are events that happened after your goroutine finished. Often these are the
next goroutine that started running or any goroutines that were unblocked by yours.
• All Connected Events: This group gives you the full "conversation" your goroutine was involved in. It
includes both the preceding and following events, plus any others that belong to the same chain of
causes and effects.
There is another view in the trace viewer that is a bit hidden, called the "trace breakdown". To see it, look to
the far right of the trace viewer and click the "File size stats" button.
520
Illustration 237. Trace event summary: see where time and space go
This feature analyzes your trace and gives you a statistical breakdown by event type. You will see counts
and categories for each event in the trace:
1. counter (357,250 events): These events track numeric values that change over time and are used to
make time-series graphs.
◦ Goroutines (273,413 events): Each event records how many goroutines are in each state (running,
runnable, or waiting) at a certain moment. A high count means a lot of goroutine state changes.
◦ Heap (70,465 events): Each event shows a change in heap memory allocation or in the garbage
collection target.
◦ Threads (13,372 events): These show how many times the thread state counter was updated during
the trace. You will see lots of these if threads start, stop, or enter/exit syscalls often.
2. flows (164,124 events): These show causal relationships, like when one goroutine unblocks another.
These are what create the arrows you see in the trace view.
◦ unblock (chan receive) (162,450 events): Shows when a goroutine is unblocked by getting data
from a channel.
◦ unblock (sync) (940 events): Shows when a goroutine is unblocked by a sync operation, such as a
mutex or WaitGroup.
◦ unblock (system goroutine wait) (454 events) and other smaller types: These track other causes
that unblock goroutines, each representing a different way for a goroutine to resume work.
521
3. begin_end (93,748 events): These mark the start and end of an activity, so you can see how long
something took.
4. instant (13,383 events): These are single point-in-time events with no duration. They show up as dots
in the trace.
◦ proc start (6,690 events): Shows when a processor (P) started to do work.
◦ proc stop (6,682 events): Shows when a processor (P) stopped doing work.
◦ There are also a few other instant event types with lower counts.
These stats are useful because they show exactly what your trace data is made of. For example, if you see
a lot of channel operation events (like the 162,450 unblock events from channel receives), it means your
application relies heavily on Go's channels for communication.
Thread-Oriented View (per-thread lanes)
OS threads are the real execution units that the operating system manages. The thread-oriented view in the
trace viewer lets you see how these OS threads are used during your program's run.
NOTE
If you are not familiar with the MPG model, or if you need a refresher, please go back to the
start of this chapter.
When you open the trace viewer at http://[::]:<port>/trace?view=thread, each row now stands for an
OS thread instead of a logical processor.
Threads are labeled by their thread ID, such as "Thread 1" or "Thread 2". These are the actual thread IDs
from the operating system, not logical processors or goroutines, and not any internal runtime thread ID.
Illustration 238. Visualizing Go program execution by OS thread
Usually, the number of threads is about the same as, or just above, the number of logical processors you
have set with GOMAXPROCS. If your program creates too many threads, your performance will get much
worse.
This view works almost the same as the "proc view". All the explanations and details about the "proc view"
also apply to the thread view.
522
Goroutine Analysis Tools (summary, breakdown, ranges)
The goroutine analysis view in Go's trace viewer is available at /goroutines (e.g.,
http://[::]:8086/goroutines). This view shows a breakdown of goroutine behavior during your program's
execution. It is a very useful tool, though often overlooked, for spotting performance bottlenecks and
understanding patterns in your Go programs.
You will see a table that groups goroutines by their start location, which is usually the function name where
the goroutine was created. Each row shows:
1. Start location: The function where the goroutine started, which acts as the group's identifier
2. Count: The total number of goroutines in this group
3. Total execution time: The total time all goroutines in this group spent running code
Illustration 239. Which goroutines are costing you the most time?
By default, the table is sorted by total execution time. The groups at the top are the ones that used the
most CPU time. This helps you quickly see which types of goroutines are costing you the most.
If you click on a goroutine group, you will go to a detailed view at /goroutine?name=[function_name]. Here,
each goroutine in the group is shown in detail. This page has three main sections: summary, breakdown,
and special ranges.
The summary section gives you high-level details about the group:
• The function where the goroutines were created,
• How many goroutines are in the group,
• What percentage of total program execution time is taken by this group.
523
Illustration 240. Goroutine group summary: creation site, count, and execution share
The summary also includes links to related profiles, such as network wait, sync block, syscall, and
scheduler wait. These are explained in the following sections.
The breakdown section is the main part of the goroutine analysis view. It is shown as a table with columns
that use different colors for different states. These states show where a goroutine spent its time, such as
executing code, blocked on synchronization, or waiting on the scheduler.
Illustration 241. Goroutine state breakdown: execution, blocking, and scheduler waits
Each row in the breakdown table stands for one goroutine, identified by its unique ID.
The columns in the breakdown table show different time categories. These are mutually exclusive, which
means a goroutine can only be in one state at any one time. The main time categories in the breakdown
section are:
• Execution time (red): This is the useful time when the goroutine is actually running on a processor and
doing its assigned work. The trace records every time a goroutine enters the GoRunning state and
measures how long it stays active before blocking, yielding, or ending.
• Block time by reason (purple): This tracks how long the goroutine is blocked, and it breaks down the
blocking time by reason. For example, it shows when a goroutine is blocked on a channel receive,
channel send, select, mutex, or something else. If the reason is empty, it means the trace did not
capture what caused that blocking period.
◦ Block time (syscall): This is the time a goroutine had to give up its processor (P) because a system
524
call was blocking and waiting for something outside the program. Not all syscalls are blocking, but
this counts only the time for blocking ones.
• Scheduler wait time (blue): This is the time a goroutine spends waiting for a processor because there
are more goroutines ready to run than processors available. This helps you spot if your program has
scheduler bottlenecks, where goroutines are ready but have to wait for CPU resources.
• Syscall execution time (dark purple): This is the time a goroutine is actually running system call code
while still owning a processor. This is when the syscall is running but has not yet released the
processor back to the scheduler.
• Unknown time (gray): This is time that does not fit into any other category. It is calculated as whatever
time is left after adding up all other categories. If you see a lot of unknown time, it might mean there
are gaps in the trace or some runtime activity that is not tracked by the trace system.
One of the most helpful visuals in the breakdown section is the stacked bar graph. This is a compact
horizontal bar that shows how the time for each goroutine is split across the different states.
Each part of the bar is color-coded to match its category. The width of each segment shows the proportion
of total lifetime the goroutine spent in that state. This makes it easy to see at a glance where the time went
for each goroutine.
NOTE
There is a small but useful feature: you can sort the breakdown table by clicking any
column header. By default, it sorts by total time in descending order.
The last section is called "Special Ranges". This section shows periods where goroutines were part of
specific runtime activities, mostly related to garbage collection.
Only goroutines that spent time in at least one special range will appear in this table.
Illustration 242. Per-goroutine GC participation times (incremental sweep, mark assist, stop-the-world)
The "Special Ranges" section is different from the "Breakdown" section above it in an important way. The
"Breakdown" section shows time categories that never overlap (like execution time or blocking time), but
the "Special Ranges" section shows periods that can overlap with regular execution statistics.
This means the time shown in special ranges is not separate from execution time. Instead, it gives you
525
another view of how a goroutine's time was used.
The Go runtime tracks these special periods with events called RangeBegin, RangeActive, and RangeEnd.
These events show when a goroutine enters, is active in, or leaves a special runtime activity. The trace
viewer uses these to add up the time each goroutine spent in these activities.
The most common special ranges you'll see include:
• GC mark assist: This is the time a goroutine spent helping the garbage collector mark objects.
Sometimes, when garbage collection is running and needs extra help, the runtime makes regular
goroutines help with marking. This can slow down their main work for a while.
• GC incremental sweep: This is the time spent cleaning up memory after the mark phase. Like mark
assist, it can take time away from the goroutine's main task.
• Stop-the-world phases (several kinds): These are periods when the goroutine was stopped because of
"stop-the-world" phases during garbage collection or other runtime events.
• GC concurrent mark phase: This shows time when the goroutine was running while the garbage
collector was marking objects at the same time as regular execution.
Because these activities can overlap, a goroutine might be both running code (counted as "Execution time"
in the Breakdown) and helping with garbage collection (counted as "GC mark assist" in Special Ranges) at
the same moment.
Profiles Generated From Traces (scheduler, sync, syscall, net)
The Go execution trace supports several special profile types that you can generate from trace data. These
profiles are different from the usual pprof profiles because they are created by analyzing state changes
and events inside the trace, not by runtime sampling.
There are 4 main profile types supported by the execution trace: block profiles, scheduler latency profiles,
syscall profiles, and I/O profiles.
• Scheduler latency profile: This tracks the delay between when a goroutine becomes runnable (ready to
run) and when it actually starts running on a processor (P). For example, if a goroutine is waiting for
data from a channel, when the data arrives, it is unblocked and becomes runnable. But it still has to
wait for the scheduler to pick it up and actually run it. The time between being unblocked and starting
execution is called scheduler latency.
• Synchronization blocking profile: This shows the time goroutines spend waiting for synchronization
reasons. It tracks time spent waiting on channels, mutexes, wait groups, and other sync primitives. The
profile adds up all the time goroutines wait at each stack trace location. For example, if five goroutines
each wait 100 ms on a mutex at the same code location, the profile will show 500 ms of contention at
that spot.
• Syscall profiles: These profiles work the same way as the sync blocking profile, but focus on time
spent waiting for system calls. The trace can tell the difference between blocking and non-blocking
syscalls.
• Network blocking profiles: This profile is different from the block profile in standard pprof profiling.
When a goroutine calls a blocking network operation, the runtime parks the goroutine and lets others
run. The block profile itself ignores I/O waits and does not report anything about sockets. It only
focuses on sync objects like channels, mutexes, sync.Cond, and select.
526
These trace-based profiles can be downloaded and used with go tool pprof like other profiles.
For example, let's look at a scheduler latency profile:
Illustration 243. Channel send is top scheduler latency hotspot
The runtime.chansend1 function is used by the Go runtime when a channel send must block. For example,
if your code does:
ch <- v // sending on an unbuffered or full channel
If there is no receiver ready, the sending goroutine is parked and cannot continue. When a receiver arrives,
the runtime wakes up the sender and puts it on the run queue.
From that moment until a processor finally picks it up, the goroutine is "runnable" but not running yet.
In this trace, all goroutines that were unblocked after waiting in chansend1 spent a combined total of 42.7
seconds waiting in the run queue before they could run again. This was 93% of all runnable-queue time for
the whole program.
NOTE
It is important to note that this is not one goroutine stalled for 42 seconds. Instead, it is
thousands or even millions of very short stalls (often microseconds or milliseconds each).
The trace adds up all these tiny stalls because they all happened at the same channel send
location.
This shows that the channel send at this code location is a major hotspot for contention. Many goroutines
block here and then wake up together, causing a lot of time to be wasted waiting to run. If you can reduce
this contention (for example, by making the channel buffer larger, speeding up the consumer, sharding, or
batching), you can directly cut down that 42 seconds and make your program faster.
527
Adding Semantics: Tasks, Regions, Logs
Tracing collects a huge amount of low-level runtime information, such as goroutine state changes, system
calls, garbage collection, and scheduler activity, as we have seen in earlier sections. But there is still a big
gap between what the runtime can see and what you, as a developer, actually care about.
For example, if you look at a typical trace of a web server, you might find thousands of goroutine creations,
network I/O events, memory allocations, and scheduler preemptions. Yet it is almost impossible to answer
simple questions like:
• Which goroutines handled the same HTTP request?
• How long did it take to process a specific user's order?
• Which database queries were part of the same transaction?
• Why was one request slower than another, even if they used the same code?
The trace might tell you that goroutine 147 blocked on a channel at a certain time, but it will not tell you that
this was actually the payment validation step for customer 12345's order. The runtime knows what
happened, but the meaning of each action is lost.
User annotations add a semantic layer that we, as developers, can use to connect our application logic to
the runtime trace. This lets us add business meaning to the trace data. Instead of just seeing a list of
runtime events, we get a clear story about what our app is doing at the business level. We can add three
types of semantic information: task, region, and log.
Tasks represent logical units of work that may include many goroutines and are meaningful in our
application. For example, we can create a task for "process HTTP request" or "execute database
transaction". By marking a task, we tell the tracer: "all activity within this context belongs to this logical
operation".
The task system supports a hierarchy. Tasks can have parent and child relationships, letting us model
complex operations with many steps:
ctx, task := trace.NewTask(parentCtx, "processRequest")
defer task.End()
When you create a new task, the tracer looks for a parent task in the context using a special key.
processRequest (top-level)
├── readFromDB (child #1)
│ └── event: query=SELECT …
└── renderResponse (child #2)
  └── event: tmpl=home.html
If the context does not have a parent, the new task is a top-level task. This inheritance means that any work
done inside the task context is automatically grouped under that task.
One of the most useful features of the task system is automatic latency measurement. The tracer tracks
528
the time between when a task is created and when End is called. You get latency measurements for every
type of task, with no extra work needed in your application code. This happens entirely inside the runtime.
Next, regions give you a more detailed way to annotate your code. They are designed to mark specific time
intervals inside a single goroutine's execution.
Unlike tasks, regions must always start and end within the same goroutine. They must also follow strict
nesting rules: a region started later must end before an earlier region can end. There are two ways to create
regions, and each serves a different purpose with its own trade-offs:
trace.WithRegion(ctx, "databaseQuery", func() {
  result, err := db.Query("SELECT * FROM users")
  // ... process result
})
WithRegion is the simple option. It takes a function, starts the region, runs your function, and ends the
region when your function returns. This cleanup is automatic and happens even if the function panics.
Internally, it is similar to:
// What WithRegion does internally
id := fromContext(ctx).id
userRegion(id, regionStartCode, regionType)
defer userRegion(id, regionEndCode, regionType)
fn()
If you need more control, use StartRegion. This lets you decide exactly when the region starts and ends:
region := trace.StartRegion(ctx, "fileProcessing")
defer region.End()
// Your code here
file, err := os.Open("data.txt")
if err != nil {
  return err
}
// ... process file
While WithRegion is easy and safe, it can feel limited for more complex code. It also uses closures, which
sometimes hold on to variables longer than needed and might affect garbage collection. StartRegion gives
you more flexibility, but you have to be careful to always call End so the region is finished properly.
Regions are always linked to whatever task is active in the current context. If there is no active task, they
are attached to the special background task (ID 0). This setup creates a natural hierarchy: tasks contain
regions. You get both a high-level view (tasks) and a detailed, internal structure (regions).
529
The rule that later regions must end before earlier ones comes from how regions are managed in the
runtime. The runtime uses a stack for each goroutine, so starting a region pushes it onto the stack, and
ending a region pops the latest one off.
Logs are different from tasks and regions. Logs record a point-in-time event and give context during
execution. They do not track duration, just moments or state information. There are two log functions: Log
for simple messages, and Logf for formatted messages, much like fmt.Sprintf:
trace.Log(ctx, "cache", "cache miss for key: " + key)
trace.Logf(ctx, "performance", "query took %v milliseconds", duration.Milliseconds())
Logs always include both a category and a message. The category is used for filtering and grouping by
trace analysis tools. The system expects only a limited number of unique categories, which helps with trace
performance and memory usage.
Up to this point, one of the most important aspects of the user annotation system is how it works with Go's
context package. Every annotation API takes a context.Context parameter, and task information is carried
through the context with a special context key. This means that the task context moves automatically
through your application's call stack. Any annotation you make with a derived context is always connected
to the correct task.
This integration with context also handles cross-goroutine cases very well. If you pass a context with task
info into a new goroutine, that goroutine's annotations are linked to the same task. This is very useful for
tracking work that happens across multiple goroutines, such as in fan-out patterns or producer-consumer
designs.
NOTE
User annotations in Go tracing are very different from microservices tracing tools like
OpenTelemetry. Go tracing shows connections between your tasks and low-level runtime
events that OpenTelemetry cannot see. OpenTelemetry is good for showing request flows
between services, but Go tracing shows you what is happening inside the Go runtime.
For example, if a database call is slow, Go tracing can tell you if the delay came from a
syscall block, slow scheduling, or network lag. OpenTelemetry would only report that the
database call was slow, without showing why.
To see this all come together, let's build a realistic example using tasks, regions, and logs. We will start with
the main function and build from there. First, we set up tracing by creating an output file and starting the
tracer.
This will record both runtime events and our user annotations:
func main() {
  f, err := os.Create("trace.out")
  if err != nil {
  log.Fatalf("Failed to create trace file: %v", err)
  }
  defer f.Close()
  if err := trace.Start(f); err != nil {
530
  log.Fatalf("Failed to start trace: %v", err)
  }
  defer trace.Stop()
  ctx := context.Background()
  ctx, rootTask := trace.NewTask(ctx, "rootTask")
  defer rootTask.End()
}
Here we create a root task called rootTask that is the parent for everything else. This gives us a single toplevel operation for the whole program run.
Let's simulate 10 concurrent requests:
func main() {
  ...
  var wg sync.WaitGroup
  for i := 0; i < 10; i++ {
  wg.Add(1)
  go func(reqID int) {
  defer wg.Done()
  handleRequest(ctx, reqID)
  }(i)
  time.Sleep(time.Millisecond * 10)
  }
  wg.Wait()
  trace.Stop()
}
Each goroutine receives the same context, so they all inherit the root task. The short sleep between
launches helps us see the requests staggered out in the trace. Next, we simulate a handler function:
func handleRequest(ctx context.Context, requestID int) {
  ctx, task := trace.NewTask(ctx, "handleRequest")
  defer task.End()
  trace.Log(ctx, "request", fmt.Sprintf("started request %d", requestID))
}
Every request creates its own task, which becomes a child of the root task. The log records a message with
a timestamp for when this request started.
The next step is validation, which we wrap in a region to measure exactly how long it takes:
func handleRequest(ctx context.Context, requestID int) {
  ...
531
  trace.WithRegion(ctx, "requestValidation", func() {
  time.Sleep(time.Millisecond * time.Duration(rand.Intn(5)+1))
  })
}
This runs synchronously and will always appear first in each request's timeline.
Here's where it gets more interesting. We now fan out to three parallel database queries, but all of them use
the same context:
func handleRequest(ctx context.Context, requestID int) {
  ...
  var wg sync.WaitGroup
  results := make(chan string, 3)
  for i := range 3 {
  wg.Add(1)
  go func(queryID int) {
  defer wg.Done()
  trace.WithRegion(ctx, fmt.Sprintf("query-%d", queryID), func() {
  result := dbQuery(ctx, requestID*10+queryID)
  results <- result
  trace.Log(ctx, "result", result)
  })
  }(i)
  }
}
This setup means all three goroutines will show up in the trace as working on the same request task. Each
one gets its own region with a name like "query-0", "query-1", or "query-2".
After the queries, we process the results in a new region:
func handleRequest(ctx context.Context, requestID int) {
  ...
  trace.WithRegion(ctx, "processResults", func() {
  for result := range results {
  time.Sleep(time.Millisecond * time.Duration(rand.Intn(5)+1))
  trace.Logf(ctx, "processing", "processed %s", result)
  }
  })
}
The logs here show exactly which results are being processed and at what time. Now let's look at the
database function:
532
func dbQuery(ctx context.Context, id int) string {
  defer trace.StartRegion(ctx, "dbQuery").End()
  trace.Log(ctx, "query", fmt.Sprintf("id=%d", id))
  trace.WithRegion(ctx, "dbConnect", func() {
  time.Sleep(time.Millisecond * time.Duration(rand.Intn(300)))
  })
  time.Sleep(time.Millisecond * time.Duration(rand.Intn(200)))
  return fmt.Sprintf("result-%d", id)
}
The whole database call is wrapped in a "dbQuery" region using a defer to ensure it always ends. Right
away, we log the ID we are querying. Inside, there is a nested "dbConnect" region for connecting, followed
by extra time for the actual query work.
This setup gives you a detailed view of all the database timing. When you run this and open the trace with
go tool trace trace.out
you will see a clear hierarchy in the viewer. You can drill down from the root task, to individual requests, to
each database operation. Logs provide helpful context at every level.
To see the full hierarchy, open go tool trace trace.out and go to the "User-defined tasks and regions"
section:
Illustration 244. Drill down into trace regions for bottleneck analysis
Click on /usertasks (the User-defined tasks link) to see a summary table of all task types in your trace. In
this example, you will see entries for "rootTask" and "handleRequest" tasks.
Each row in the summary shows the task type, how many tasks of that type were created, and a distribution
of durations:
533
Illustration 245. Task summary showing count and duration buckets
Keep in mind, these timing statistics only include tasks that have finished. The rootTask usually does not
show a distribution because it is probably still running when the trace ends. For the handleRequest tasks,
you can see all 10 requests we created. The duration buckets break down as follows:
• 158.489319ms: 1 task finished between 158.489319ms and 251.188643ms
• 251.188643ms: 8 tasks finished between 251.188643ms and 398.10717ms
• 398.10717ms: 1 task finished between 398.10717ms and 630.957344ms
• 630.957344ms: This bucket shows up even though there are no tasks in it. The Go trace system uses a
logarithmic histogram, so every bucket from minimum to maximum is shown, even if some have zero
tasks.
This means most tasks (8 out of 10) took between 251ms and 398ms to complete. This matches what we
would expect, given the random sleep ranges in our example code.
To see the exact sequence of events for a specific task duration, click on the time range or the count in the
summary. This takes you to the /usertask?type=handleRequest view, which shows a chronological
breakdown for each individual handleRequest task:
534
Illustration 246. Detailed event timeline for handleRequest user task.
For every event, the trace viewer shows the absolute timestamp since the start of the trace, the time
elapsed since the previous event in that task, and the goroutine where the event happened. For example,
starting at timestamp 0.043904384s, Task 6 began with the following sequence:
• Initial setup (first 5ms): The task starts, logs "started request 4", and runs the requestValidation
region, which takes about 5.6ms. You can see this region start at 0.043908672 and end at
0.049555904.
• Fan-out to parallel queries: After validation, it immediately starts the processResults region and then
launches the three database query goroutines. All of them begin almost at the same time:
◦ query-0 starts at 0.049566592 on goroutine 8
◦ query-1 starts at 0.049569088 on goroutine 9
◦ query-2 starts at 0.049580096 on goroutine 10
• The bottleneck: Each query has nested dbQuery and dbConnect regions. Look at the dbConnect
durations:
◦ query-2's dbConnect (goroutine 10): starts at 0.049581184, ends at 0.082761024 = 33ms
◦ query-0's dbConnect (goroutine 8): starts at 0.049568448, ends at 0.136847168 = 87ms
◦ query-1's dbConnect (goroutine 9): starts at 0.049570496, ends at 0.151650752 = 102ms
This shows that the random sleep in our dbConnect region (from 0 to 300ms) is causing the main
bottleneck. query-1 took the longest at 102ms for just the connection phase. This determined the overall
request latency, since all queries must finish before the request can complete.
If you prefer a visual representation instead of the text or tabular view, you can click on Task 6 (goroutine
view). This view shows the same information but in a much more visual format:
535
Illustration 247. Visual trace of handleRequest task timeline
There is also a region summary view, which is similar to /usertask?type=handleRequest and offers the
same features. It shows each region instance along with a distribution of durations:
Illustration 248. Region summary: dbConnect and dbQuery durations
The only difference is in the detail view for each region. While it does not display logs, it does show a
breakdown similar to what we saw in the goroutine analysis view earlier:
536
Illustration 249. Detailed breakdown of dbConnect region timing
This kind of visual analysis is really valuable for learning Go. You can actually see how goroutines,
channels, and the scheduler interact. For example, you can see how go func() creates new goroutines and
when they yield to others.
It is important to keep performance in mind when using user annotations. The tracing system is built to be
lightweight when tracing is turned off, but it still allocates task objects just in case tracing gets turned on
during the task's lifetime.
Under the Hood
Understanding how trace works is not required, so feel free to skip this section if you want.
Buffering & Generations (full/empty queues)
At the center of Go's tracing system is a global trace object that manages everything. This central piece
coordinates the whole tracing operation:
 1 var trace struct {
 2 ...
 3
 4 reading *traceBuf
 5 empty *traceBuf
 6 full [2]traceBufQueue
 7 workAvailable atomic.Bool
 8
 9 readerGen atomic.Uintptr // the generation the reader is currently reading
  for
10 flushedGen atomic.Uintptr // the last completed generation
11 ...
12 gen atomic.Uintptr // the current generation
13 }
14
15 type traceBufQueue struct {
537
16 head, tail *traceBuf
17 }
During program execution, the tracer collects a lot of information—like which goroutines are running, when
they block, and when garbage collection occurs. All of this information is recorded as events in memory.
These events need a place to go, and that place is called the trace buffer (tracebuf).
These buffers are global, meaning they are shared across the system and not tied to a single goroutine or
thread. However, writing directly to these shared buffers would create too much contention because many
goroutines could try to write at once. Instead, each thread keeps two private 64 KB trace buffers:
type mTraceState struct {
  seqlock atomic.Uintptr
  buf [2]*traceBuf // Two buffers for alternating generations
  link *m
}
type traceBuf struct {
  _ sys.NotInHeap
  traceBufHeader
  arr [64<<10 - unsafe.Sizeof(traceBufHeader{})]byte
}
So, when a goroutine running on a thread needs to record a trace event, it writes into its own thread's active
buffer for the current generation. Since the buffer is private to the thread, and a thread only runs one
goroutine at a time, there is no need for extra locking. The global buffers in trace are used when data from
these local buffers is ready to be read.
Why are there two buffers ([2]*traceBuf) per thread? The tracing system is organized into generations.
Each generation keeps its trace data separate.
When many threads write events at the same time, but only one goroutine reads them later, they need to
avoid getting in each other's way. With only one buffer per thread, there are two main problems:
• If a thread is still writing, the reader cannot safely read the buffer.
• If there is no clear stopping point for writing, memory cannot be safely reused, and memory use could
grow forever.
Generations solve both issues.
538
Illustration 250. Buffers ensure threads and readers don't clash
Threads write to their buffer for the current generation. After some time, usually about a second, Go's tracer
ends that generation (for example, generation 5). All threads are told to stop writing to the generation 5
buffer (buf[1]) and switch to a new buffer for generation 6 (buf[0]). Now, the reader can safely read the
data from generation 5, knowing that no more events are being written there. When reading is done, the
memory for that generation can be used again.
This setup gives us three major benefits:
1. Writers and the reader never access the same data at the same time, so everything stays safe.
2. We can always tell when it's safe to reuse or free memory.
3. The reader always gets a complete and finished set of trace events for each generation, making
processing simple.
Advancing to the next generation happens regularly—usually once every second. This time window is long
enough to collect useful trace data, but short enough that no single generation becomes too large. The
process of moving to the next generation is handled in a background goroutine, so it does not block or slow
down your main program.
NOTE
Other optimizations, like reusing string tables, stack tables, and type tables, also benefit
from generations, but we will not cover those here.
Trace Locker
After a short period, the runtime decides it is time to advance to a new generation. This step is called
"generation advancement". Before switching generations, the runtime has to be sure that no thread is still
writing to the old generation's buffer. Once the switch happens, the old buffers might get flushed,
processed, or freed. To make sure this is safe, the runtime uses a system called the trace locker.
Each thread has a sequence lock (seqlock), which is simply an atomic counter:
type m struct {
  ...
  trace mTraceState
}
539
type mTraceState struct {
  seqlock atomic.Uintptr // seqlock indicates this thread is writing to a trace
buffer.
  buf [2]*traceBuf // Per-thread traceBuf for writing. Indexed by trace.gen%2.
  link *m // Snapshot of alllink or freelink.
}
When a thread wants to write trace events, it calls traceAcquire(), which increases its sequence lock
(seqlock) by 1.
seq := mp.trace.seqlock.Add(1)
If the sequence lock is an odd number, it means "this thread is writing trace events now." When the thread
finishes, it calls traceRelease(), which adds 1 again, making the sequence lock even. So, an even
sequence lock means "this thread is not writing right now."
When it's time to move to a new generation, the tracer increases the generation number, for example to 5,
and all threads with a new trace locker start writing to the generation 5 buffer. The tracer can then safely
process or reuse the generation 4 buffers for all threads, but only if the sequence lock is even.
Why? Because there could be a race where a thread is still writing to the generation 4 buffer (buf[0]) when
the tracer switches to generation 5:
Illustration 251. Thread B hasn't finished with previous generation.
The next time thread B grabs the trace locker, it will write to the generation 5 buffer (buf[1]). The tracer
checks the sequence lock of each thread, and if the sequence lock is even, it is safe to say that the thread
has switched to the new generation.
If any thread has an odd sequence lock, that means it is still writing trace data.
In that case, the tracer waits until the thread is done:
540
for mToFlush != nil {
  prev := &mToFlush
  for mp := *prev; mp != nil; {
  if mp.trace.seqlock.Load()%2 != 0 {
  // The thread is writing. Come back to it later.
  ...
  continue
  }
  ...
  }
  // Yield only if we're going around the loop again.
  if mToFlush != nil {
  osyield()
  }
}
The thread might be writing to the generation 5 buffer (buf[1]) or the generation 6 buffer (buf[0]), and that
is fine. The tracer skips over it, processes other threads, and comes back later to check the sequence lock
again.
NOTE
In theory, the tracer could do a generation-aware check. It could flush the generation 5
buffer if it knows the thread is already working with the generation 6 buffer. However, this
would need extra state. It would require reading the writer's current generation (which
means another atomic read and a memory fence to keep everything in sync).
If the thread is not writing, then the tracer flushes its trace buffer to the global container (trace.full). A
thread that has had its buffer flushed does not need to wait for other threads. It can immediately keep
collecting trace data in the new generation's buffer.
The key part of this system is the traceLocker structure. It gives exclusive access to a thread's trace
resources when emitting events:
• Any part of the runtime that wants to write a trace event must first acquire a locker (traceAcquire()),
which makes the sequence lock odd.
• When done, it releases the lock (traceRelease()), which makes the sequence lock even again.
Trace Writer
The trace writer acts as the link between the trace locker and the buffer management system. It lets you
write trace events while taking care of all the buffer allocation, flushing, and synchronization details:
type traceWriter struct {
  traceLocker
  *traceBuf
}
541
The trace writer uses a fluent API pattern, where every method returns a new trace writer instance. This lets
you chain methods together. For example, to flush and end a trace writer, you can do:
statusWriter.flush().end()
Now that you have seen all the main parts of the tracer, it is time to see how they work together.
Event Pipeline
When tracing starts using StartTrace(), the system goes through several initialization steps to reset its
state and record the initial runtime state. However, this initialization requires stopping the world (STW).
STW Bootstrap
Once tracing is enabled, goroutines that emit events will automatically write status events for themselves
and also for other goroutines they interact with, if those have not been traced yet. To understand this
better, let's see how a goroutine writes status events:
trace := traceAcquire()
... PROBLEM WINDOW
casgstatus(gp, _Gwaiting, _Grunnable)
if trace.ok() {
  trace.GoUnpark(gp, 2)
  traceRelease(trace)
}
This code should look familiar after reading about the trace locker. To recap: when a goroutine wants to
emit trace events, it first acquires a trace locker. If tracing is enabled, traceAcquire() returns a valid trace
locker—think of it as permission to emit events.
If tracing is not enabled, traceAcquire() returns an invalid trace locker. The goroutine then performs its
state change and, if needed, emits the trace event (like GoUnpark above). After emitting, it must call
traceRelease() to clean up the tracing state.
A risky scenario appears when a goroutine calls traceAcquire() before tracing is enabled, and then tracing
is enabled while that goroutine is still running. The sequence goes like this:
1. Goroutine A calls traceAcquire() while tracing is still off and gets an invalid locker.
2. Trace initialization begins and tracing is turned on.
3. Goroutine B calls traceAcquire() and gets a valid trace locker because tracing is now on.
4. Goroutine B reads goroutine C's status, sees it as waiting, and emits a waiting event for goroutine C.
5. Goroutine A changes goroutine C's status from waiting to runnable. But since it had an invalid locker
from before, it does not emit the new state for C.
Now the trace is inconsistent: it shows goroutine C as waiting, but it is actually runnable. Later events will
542
expect that state change, but the transition was never recorded.
Stopping the world removes this problem. When the world restarts, every goroutine's next call to
traceAcquire() will return a valid trace locker. No goroutine will be left holding a stale, invalid locker.
While the world is stopped, the runtime also records an initial, explicit status event for every goroutine and
every P (processor):
func StartTrace() error {
  ...
  stw := stopTheWorld(stwStartTrace)
  ...
  // Make sure a ProcStatus is emitted for every P, while we're here.
  for _, pp := range allp {
  tl.writer().writeProcStatusForP(pp, pp == tl.mp.p.ptr()).end()
  }
  ...
  startTheWorld(stw)
}
Figure 140. StartTrace STW (src/runtime/trace.go)
This way, the trace has a clear baseline for all goroutines and processors, even if nothing happens
immediately after tracing starts.
Event Writing (proc, goroutine, STW, GC, user)
The execution tracer acquires a trace locker at many important points throughout the Go runtime to
capture execution events. Let's quickly walk through some of the key types of events.
Processor events track the lifecycle and state changes of Go's logical processors (Ps), which are the
execution contexts for running goroutines:
const (
  // Procs.
  traceEvProcsChange // current value of GOMAXPROCS [timestamp, GOMAXPROCS, stack
ID]
  traceEvProcStart // start of P [timestamp, P ID, P seq]
  traceEvProcStop // stop of P [timestamp]
  traceEvProcSteal // P was stolen [timestamp, P ID, P seq, M ID]
  traceEvProcStatus // P status at the start of a generation [timestamp, P ID,
status]
)
Goroutine lifecycle events provide a full picture of goroutine behavior, covering creation, execution,
blocking, unblocking, and destruction:
543
const (
  // Goroutines.
  traceEvGoCreate // goroutine creation [timestamp, new goroutine ID, new
stack ID, stack ID]
  traceEvGoCreateSyscall // goroutine appears in syscall (cgo callback)
[timestamp, new goroutine ID]
  traceEvGoStart // goroutine starts running [timestamp, goroutine ID,
goroutine seq]
  traceEvGoDestroy // goroutine ends [timestamp]
  traceEvGoDestroySyscall // goroutine ends in syscall (cgo callback) [timestamp]
  traceEvGoStop // goroutine yields its time, but is runnable
[timestamp, reason, stack ID]
  traceEvGoBlock // goroutine blocks [timestamp, reason, stack ID]
  traceEvGoUnblock // goroutine is unblocked [timestamp, goroutine ID,
goroutine seq, stack ID]
  traceEvGoSyscallBegin // syscall enter [timestamp, P seq, stack ID]
  traceEvGoSyscallEnd // syscall exit [timestamp]
  traceEvGoSyscallEndBlocked // syscall exit and it blocked at some point
[timestamp]
  traceEvGoStatus // goroutine status at the start of a generation
[timestamp, goroutine ID, M ID, status]
)
Next, STW events capture global runtime pauses that affect all goroutines. These events mark the start and
end of stop-the-world (STW) phases, recording when all goroutines are paused and when they are allowed
to resume. The "kind" parameter shows the reason for the STW pause.
const (
  // STW.
  traceEvSTWBegin // STW start [timestamp, kind]
  traceEvSTWEnd // STW done [timestamp]
)
GC events track all phases of garbage collection, from high-level GC cycles to detailed sweep and mark
assist operations. Heap allocation and heap goal events track memory usage changes that drive GC
decisions. Mark assist events show when user goroutines help with GC marking work:
const (
  // GC events.
  traceEvGCActive // GC active [timestamp, seq]
  traceEvGCBegin // GC start [timestamp, seq, stack ID]
  traceEvGCEnd // GC done [timestamp, seq]
  traceEvGCSweepActive // GC sweep active [timestamp, P ID]
  traceEvGCSweepBegin // GC sweep start [timestamp, stack ID]
  traceEvGCSweepEnd // GC sweep done [timestamp, swept bytes, reclaimed
bytes]
  traceEvGCMarkAssistActive // GC mark assist active [timestamp, goroutine ID]
544
  traceEvGCMarkAssistBegin // GC mark assist start [timestamp, stack ID]
  traceEvGCMarkAssistEnd // GC mark assist done [timestamp]
  traceEvHeapAlloc // gcController.heapLive change [timestamp, heap alloc
in bytes]
  traceEvHeapGoal // gcController.heapGoal() change [timestamp, heap goal
in bytes]
)
Annotation events capture user-defined trace information that developers can add for debugging and
profiling. These match the user-facing trace API and let you add custom instrumentation to your code.
Labels add metadata to goroutines, tasks provide hierarchical grouping for related work, regions mark
spans of interest, and logs record key-value data:
const (
  // Annotations.
  traceEvGoLabel // apply string label to current running goroutine
[timestamp, label string ID]
  traceEvUserTaskBegin // trace.NewTask [timestamp, internal task ID, internal
parent task ID, name string ID, stack ID]
  traceEvUserTaskEnd // end of a task [timestamp, internal task ID, stack ID]
  traceEvUserRegionBegin // trace.{Start,With}Region [timestamp, internal task ID,
name string ID, stack ID]
  traceEvUserRegionEnd // trace.{End,With}Region [timestamp, internal task ID,
name string ID, stack ID]
  traceEvUserLog // trace.Log [timestamp, internal task ID, key string ID,
stack, value string ID]
)
Each event is represented by an int constant. The comments next to each constant describe what the
event means and what arguments it includes. These events are collected throughout the runtime using the
traceAcquire() and traceRelease() pattern. For example, GC events are emitted during garbage collection
as in this snippet:
trace := traceAcquire()
if trace.ok() {
  trace.GCStart()
  traceRelease(trace)
}
When a goroutine acquires the trace locker, it prevents preemption by binding itself to its thread (M). Any
stop-the-world pause by the garbage collector or other runtime operations will be delayed until the trace
locker is released. The goroutine then acquires the sequence lock (seqlock) on its thread's trace state by
incrementing it to an odd value. This marks that the thread is actively writing trace events.
The trace locker now holds two things: the thread (M) and the current generation number:
545
Illustration 252. Trace locker binds goroutine to thread and generation
If the tracer is not enabled (for example, the current generation is 0 or the global trace.enabled is false), it
returns an invalid trace locker with generation set to 0:
// ok returns true if the traceLocker is valid (i.e. tracing is enabled).
//
// nosplit because it's called on the syscall path when stack movement is forbidden.
//
//go:nosplit
func (tl traceLocker) ok() bool {
  return tl.gen != 0
}
Figure 141. traceLocker.ok() (src/runtime/traceruntime.go)
When a goroutine emits an event, it creates a trace writer:
func (tl traceLocker) writer() traceWriter {
  return traceWriter{traceLocker: tl, traceBuf: tl.mp.trace.buf[tl.gen%2]}
}
Illustration 253. Writer connects trace locker to correct buffer
For example, if we are on generation 1, tl.gen%2 equals 1, so tl.mp.trace.buf[1] points to the second
buffer. The trace writer now acts as the bridge that holds both the locking logic and the actual buffer where
events will be written.
The trace system follows an important rule: every active scheduling resource (goroutines and processors)
must have their status explicitly recorded at least once in each generation. This status event acts as the
baseline state for the resource, so all later events in that generation can be interpreted correctly. If a
goroutine participates in any traced event during a generation, the tracer automatically emits a status event
for it if none has been recorded yet:
func (tl traceLocker) eventWriter(goStatus traceGoStatus, procStatus traceProcStatus)
traceEventWriter {
546
  // Get the underlying trace writer that will write to the trace buffer
  w := tl.writer()
  // Check if we need to emit a processor status event
  // Write a ProcStatus event to establish the processor's baseline state
  if pp := tl.mp.p.ptr(); pp != nil && !pp.trace.statusWasTraced(tl.gen) && pp.
trace.acquireStatus(tl.gen) {
  w = w.writeProcStatus(uint64(pp.id), procStatus, pp.trace.inSweep)
  }
  // Check if we need to emit a goroutine status event
  // Write a GoStatus event to establish the goroutine's baseline state
  if gp := tl.mp.curg; gp != nil && !gp.trace.statusWasTraced(tl.gen) && gp.trace
.acquireStatus(tl.gen) {
  w = w.writeGoStatus(uint64(gp.goid), int64(tl.mp.procid), goStatus, gp
.inMarkAssist, 0 /* no stack */)
  }
  return traceEventWriter{w}
}
However, the trace writer does not write the event immediately. It first checks that the buffer has enough
free space for the event:
// ensure makes sure that at least maxSize bytes are available to write.
//
// Returns whether the buffer was flushed.
func (w traceWriter) ensure(maxSize int) (traceWriter, bool) {
  refill := w.traceBuf == nil || !w.available(maxSize)
  if refill {
  w = w.refill(traceNoExperiment)
  }
  return w, refill
}
If the buffer does not have enough space, the writer will flush the current buffer to the trace system's full
buffer queue, which holds all completed and immutable buffers. It then refills itself with a new empty
buffer. The full process of flushing and getting a new buffer is handled in the refill method.
Let's first look at how a buffer is flushed to the global trace system:
547
Illustration 254. Buffers are flushed into full queue
The trace.full structure is made of two linked lists—one for each generation. Each list uses a simple
queue with head and tail pointers. When a buffer is finished (flushed), it is added to the end of the queue
for its generation. This is done by updating the current tail's link and moving the tail pointer to the new
buffer.
When the trace reader needs to read, it removes buffers from the front of the queue by following the head
pointer and moving it along the link chain.
That covers flushing, but where does the new buffer come from for the thread's trace writer?
There are two ways to refill a buffer. The writer can either reuse a buffer from the tracer's empty list, or, if
there are no empty buffers available, allocate a new 64 KB buffer from the operating system:
Illustration 255. Trace writer requests buffer from empty list
The empty list is another linked list, separate from the full list. It holds buffers that are no longer in
use—buffers that were previously full, have been read completely by the trace reader, and then returned for
reuse.
The reader plays a major role in this system by returning buffers to the empty list after they are finished:
548
Illustration 256. Full and empty buffers coordinate tracing
Here is the source code for the refill function:
func (w traceWriter) refill(exp traceExperiment) traceWriter {
  systemstack(func() {
  lock(&trace.lock)
  if w.traceBuf != nil {
  traceBufFlush(w.traceBuf, w.gen) // flush
  }
  // refill
  if trace.empty != nil {
  w.traceBuf = trace.empty
  trace.empty = w.traceBuf.link
  unlock(&trace.lock)
  } else {
  unlock(&trace.lock)
  w.traceBuf = (*traceBuf)(sysAlloc(unsafe.Sizeof(traceBuf{}), &memstats
.other_sys))
  if w.traceBuf == nil {
  throw("trace: out of memory")
  }
  }
  })
  ...
}
Figure 142. refill (src/runtime/tracebuf.go)
Each event is written along with its "timestamp delta". Each trace buffer keeps a lastTime field to track the
timestamp of the most recent event written to that buffer. When writing a new event, the system calculates
the difference between the current time and lastTime, and stores only this delta in the trace data:
// traceEventWrite is the part of traceEvent that actually writes the event.
func (w traceWriter) event(ev traceEv, args ...traceArg) traceWriter {
  // Make sure we have room.
  w, _ = w.ensure(1 + (len(args)+1)*traceBytesPerNumber)
  // Compute the timestamp diff that we'll put in the trace.
  ts := traceClockNow()
  if ts <= w.traceBuf.lastTime {
  ts = w.traceBuf.lastTime + 1
549
  }
  tsDiff := uint64(ts - w.traceBuf.lastTime)
  w.traceBuf.lastTime = ts
  // Write out event.
  w.byte(byte(ev))
  w.varint(tsDiff)
  for _, arg := range args {
  w.varint(uint64(arg))
  }
  return w
}
This delta-based method reduces the space required to store timestamps, since most deltas are much
smaller than full timestamps. Smaller numbers are more efficient to encode using variable-length
encoding, so this approach saves significant space in the trace data.
Each trace event in Go's execution trace is stored in a binary and compact format that follows a specific
layout:
[event type][timestamp delta][arg0][arg1][arg2]...
After all events are written, the goroutine calls traceWriter.end() to complete the operation. This method
updates the trace buffer pointer in the M's trace state at mp.trace.buf[gen%2], making sure any changes
(like acquiring a new buffer during writing) are saved for future writes by this thread:
Illustration 257. Trace writer updates buffer reference after writing
Finally, the goroutine releases the trace locker, increments the sequence lock again (making it even), and
also releases the M so that preemption can happen.
This is how the trace mechanism works with careful design:
• Each thread writes its trace events into its own private buffer, so there is no contention over shared
resources or unnecessary waiting.
• The runtime occasionally creates a new generation, making sure all the old data is sealed and safe to
read by using the sequence lock, while new events are written into a fresh buffer.
• Delta-based timestamp encoding reduces the space needed to store timestamps, making the trace
550
more efficient.
All of these are practical design choices and can be applied to other high performance applications.